Spring boot using java modules (#341)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2020-07-02-spring-boot-using-java-modules.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Build a Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modules"
author: bruno-leite
by: contractor
communities: [java]
description: "This tutorial shows how to create a multi-module Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modular system"
tags: [spring-boot, java, modules]
tweets:
- "Learn how to create a @springboot application using Java 9+ modular system"
- "Tutorial: Java 9+ modules with @springboot"
- "Spring Boot + Java Modules? Check it out"
image:
type: conversion
---

Java is one of the most mature and persistent development languages that exist. Recently it entered into a 6-month release schedule which enabled to deliver more frequent updates to the language.

> One of that changes was the modular system that is available since Java 9.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of those changes was the modular system that is available since Java 9.
```

If you don't have one already, I'd suggest getting an account on grammarly.com.
I usually cut/paste my posts in there and it finds a lot of minor errors. It doesn't handle markdown, so it will show errors with backticks, but I just ignore those ones.

The Modular system came to address a recurring concern on Java apps: 'how to hide classes from libraries that are not meant to be used outside or just by specific applications?'
We know that we have the visibility modifiers: public, private, protected and default, but those are not enough to provide external visibility. It is common for a class to live inside a package and be used throughout the library, but it may be a class not meant for external use. Therefore, it has public visibility but on the other side it shouldn't be available for applications depending on that library. This is the situation in which the Modular System can help.

**Table of Contents**{: .hide }
* Table of Contents
{:toc}

## Introduction 

> On Java 8 and backwards the JDK was a single unit and it was needed to install it entirely even if you were just using a couple JDK classes. So starting on Java 9 there was a huge change on JDK classes so that the entire JDK was modularized. Various modules were created to organize the contents of the JDK, some examples are `java.base`, `java.sql`, `java.xml` and so on. To have an idea there are a total of 60 modules in Java 14 JDK.

Reviewer: The first line isn't clear, maybe mention that the JDK was "packaged" as a single unit? (that probably isn't the best wording either).

The modularization also enabled the possibility of reducing the Java runtime to include, let's say, just the `java.base` if your application depends just on this module. By using the `jlink` tool, that is bundled with the JDK, you can create a micro runtime  with just the JDK modules you need.

In this article we'll be covering how to develop a simple application with two modules: the `application` module that contains the web-facing classes and the `persistence` module that contains data access layer. We'll also be using a couple dependencies to illustrate how to use those on a modular application: `spring-boot-starter-data-mongodb` and `okta-spring-boot-starter`

To go through this article you should have at least some basic understanding of Spring Boot, Maven, REST webservices principles and Docker installed.

## Install a Java 9+ JDK

First you'll need a Java 9+ JDK to use modules. If you have been using Java 8 then you'll probably have to download a separate JDK with version of 9 or later to be used on this tutorial.
Make sure that your JAVA_HOME environment variable is poiting to that JDK.

> ## Project structure

Reviewer: You could also use this spot to link the completed source code repository on github (just use your own repo URL, and we can update that later)

│           └── java
└── pom.xml
```

### How to tie up the three pom.xml files on Maven?

First, let's define the root pom.xml. It will contain the common `<parent>` indication to `spring-boot-started-parent` and two entries on `<module>` section, that are the name of the directories for the modules we are developing. Please note that those are specific to Maven and specify sub-projects and have nothing to do with the Java modules that we'll be working later on.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-parent</artifactId>
        <version>2.3.1.RELEASE</version>
        <relativePath/> <!-- lookup parent from repository -->
    </parent>
    <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
    <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <packaging>pom</packaging>

    <properties>

>     	<java.version>11</java.version>

Author: Ok, on the JDK installation part I've mentioned it can be any JDK 9+ but added that this tutorial will be using version 11.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
        <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </parent>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-app</artifactId>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-persistence</artifactId>
            <version>${project.version}</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
                <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>

</project>
```

> At last we have the `persistence` module which will have a pom.xml like the one below, also pointing to the parent pom.xml that was first defined. This one will have a dependency on `spring-data-mongo` as we'll be saving our data to a Mongo DB.

Author: Yes, it could be, but the `persistence` pom also references the `root` pom as a parent. So both reference each other. 
The `persistence` pom references the `root` pom `groupId` and `artifactId`. Wouldn't make much sense to show the `persistence` pom first showing this unknown parent pom.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
        <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </parent>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-persistence</artifactId>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-data-mongodb</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

</project>
```

This project structure should be compiling fine if you go to the project root and execute `mvn compile`. Please note that Maven uses the JDK defined by the environment variable JAVA_HOME. So please use JAVA_HOME poiting to a Java 9+ JDK.

> Please don't confuse Maven modules with Java Modules. Maven modules are just a separation into sub-projects. 

Author: Cool. I've explained that better now.

Add the following dependency to your `application/pom.xml` file:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.okta.spring</groupId>
    <artifactId>okta-spring-boot-starter</artifactId>
    <version>1.3.0</version>
</dependency>
```

### Register an application on Okta

To begin, sign up for a [forever-free Okta developer account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/).

Once you're signed in to Okta, register your client application.

* In the top menu, click on **Applications**
* Click on **Add Application**
* Select **Web** and click **Next**
* Enter `Spring Boot with Java Modules` for the **Name** (this value doesn't matter, so feel free to change it)
* Change the Login redirect URI to be `http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/okta`
* Click **Done**

### Configure the app with Okta information

Create a file `application/src/main/resources/application.properties` with the following content:

```
okta.oauth2.issuer=https://{orgUrl}/oauth2/default
okta.oauth2.clientId={clientId}
okta.oauth2.clientSecret={clientSecret} 
```

You can find {clientId} and {clientSecret} in your application setup:  

> {% img blog/spring-boot-with-modules/okta-app.png alt:"Okta app setup" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Author: I've reduced the image to the correct size

### Modularize `persistence` library

Create a module declaration file `persistence/src/main/java/module-info.java` with the following content:

```java
module com.okta.developer.modules.persistence {

    requires java.annotation;
    requires spring.beans;
    requires spring.context;
    requires spring.data.commons;
    requires spring.data.mongodb;

    exports com.okta.developer.animals.bird;

}
```

Each `requires` keyword signalize that this module will be depending on some other module.
Spring, on version 5, is not modularized yet so its JAR files doesn't have the `module-info.java`. 
When you have a dependency on the `modulepath` (former classpath for non modular applications) like this they will be available as `automatic modules`.

An `automatic module` gets its name from the property `Automatic-Module-Name` inside `MANIFEST.MF` or from the filename itself if that is absent.

On Spring 5 the team was nice enough to put the `Automatic-Module-Name` for all the libraries. So those are the names used on our persistence app dependencies: `spring.beans`, `spring.context`, `spring.data.commons`, `spring.data.mongodb`.

> The `exports` keyword means that all classes on that package will be available for modules that uses this one.

Reviewer: maybe tie this into how `requires` will be used below?
```suggestion
The `exports` keyword means that all classes in this package will be available to modules that "require" this one.
```

### Modularize `application` app

Create a module declaration file `application/src/main/java/module-info.java` with the following content:

```java
module com.okta.developer.modules.app {

    requires com.okta.developer.modules.persistence;

    requires spring.web;
    requires spring.boot;
    requires spring.boot.autoconfigure;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

}
```

This one is similar to the first one but besides the Spring dependencies we also have the `com.okta.developer.modules.persistence` dependency. That is the other module we have developed.

## Running the app

Go to the project root and run 
```bash
mvn install && mvn spring-boot:run -pl application
```

Again, if everything went correctly you'll be able, after logging in, to navigate to `localhost:8080/bird` and see a JSON output.

> 

Reviewer: Add a "wrap up" section. similar to something like this: https://developer.okta.com/blog/2020/06/26/spring-boot-vue-kotlin#moving-forward-with-okta-vue-and-spring-boot

idea: Consider adding some sort of "private" utility class to show how that class cannot be used outside of it's module unless it is "exported", or maybe just show the compile error if you didn't export `com.okta.developer.animals.bird` 

(i'm not sure how that would flow the reader though, just ideas 😄)

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Build a Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modules"
author: bruno-leite
by: contractor
communities: [java]
description: "This tutorial shows how to create a multi-module Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modular system"
tags: [spring-boot, java, modules]
tweets:
- "Learn how to create a @springboot application using Java 9+ modular system"
- "Tutorial: Java 9+ modules with @springboot"
- "Spring Boot + Java Modules? Check it out"
image:
type: conversion
---

Java is one of the most mature and persistent development languages that exist. Recently it entered into a 6-month release schedule which enabled to deliver more frequent updates to the language.
One of those changes was the modular system that is available since Java 9.

> The Modular system came to address a recurring concern on Java apps: 'how to hide classes from libraries that are not meant to be used outside or just by specific applications?'

Reviewer: Maybe qualify this 
> used outside [the jar, the project, etc]

> We know that we have the visibility modifiers: public, private, protected and default, but those are not enough to provide external visibility. It is common for a class to live inside a package and be used throughout the library, but it may be a class not meant for external use. Therefore, it has public visibility but on the other side, it shouldn't be available for applications depending on that library. This is the situation in which the Modular System can help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We know that we have the visibility modifiers: public, private, protected and default, but those are not enough to provide external visibility. It is common for a class to live inside a package and be used throughout the library, but it may be a class not meant for external use. Therefore, it has public visibility but on the other side, it shouldn't be available for applications depending on that library. This is the situation in which the Java Platform Module System (JPMS) can help.
```

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-parent</artifactId>
        <version>2.3.1.RELEASE</version>
        <relativePath/> <!-- lookup parent from repository -->
    </parent>
    <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
    <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <packaging>pom</packaging>

    <properties>
    	<java.version>11</java.version>
    </properties>

    <modules>
        <module>application</module>
        <module>persistence</module>
    </modules>

</project>
```

> The `application` module will have a pom.xml like below, pointing to the parent pom.xml that was described above. It will also have a dependency on `spring-boot-starter-web` because we'll be creating some REST endpoints on it and also a dependency on our 'persistence' module that will be described next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `application` module will have a `pom.xml` like below, pointing to the parent pom.xml that was described above. It will also have a dependency on `spring-boot-starter-web` because we'll be creating some REST endpoints on it and also a dependency on our 'persistence' module that will be described next.
```

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
        <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </parent>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-app</artifactId>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-persistence</artifactId>
            <version>${project.version}</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
                <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>

</project>

> ```

Reviewer: I suggest moving this code block and the related text to after defining the `persistence` module. This may help better explain where the `spring-boot-with-modules-persistence` comes from

At last, we have the `persistence` module which will have a `pom.xml` like the one below, also pointing to the parent pom.xml that was first defined. This one will have a dependency on `spring-data-mongo` as we'll be saving our data to a Mongo DB.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.okta.developer</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules</artifactId>
        <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </parent>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-with-modules-persistence</artifactId>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-data-mongodb</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

</project>
```

> This project structure is enough for compiling if you go to the project root and run `mvn compile`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the project run `mvn compile` from the project root.
```

Reviewer: (or use `mvn package`)

**NOTE:** Please don't confuse Maven modules with Java Modules. 

**Maven modules** are used to separate a project into multiple sub-projects. The main project will have a `pom.xml` referencing sub-projects on `<modules>` section. Each sub-project will have its own `pom.xml`. When building the main project it will automatically build the sub-projects too.

> **Java modules** is another name for JPMS (Java Platform Module System), added on JDK 9 under the name Project Jigsaw. It allows applications (packaged as JAR or WAR) to define a `module-info.java` file on its root with directives that control which classes the application will allow others to access and which other modules it needs on compile or runtime.

Reviewer: I like how this is broken out into Maven and Java modules!

    <version>1.3.0</version>
</dependency>
```

### Register an Application on Okta

To begin, sign up for a [forever-free Okta developer account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/).

Once you're signed in to Okta, register your client application.

* In the top menu, click on **Applications**
* Click on **Add Application**
* Select **Web** and click **Next**
* Enter `Spring Boot with Java Modules` for the **Name** (this value doesn't matter, so feel free to change it)
* Change the Login redirect URI to be `http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/okta`
* Click **Done**

### Configure the App with Okta Information

Create a file `application/src/main/resources/application.properties` with the following content:

```
okta.oauth2.issuer=https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
okta.oauth2.clientId={clientId}
okta.oauth2.clientSecret={clientSecret} 
```

You can find {clientId} and {clientSecret} in your application setup:  

{% img blog/spring-boot-with-modules/okta-app.png alt:"Okta app setup" width:"542" %}{: .center-image }

The {yourOktaDomain} you can find on Okta dashboard:  

{% img blog/spring-boot-with-modules/org-url.png alt:"Okta Domain" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> Now if you restart the app and navigate to `http://localhost:8080/bird` you'll get a login page appearing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now if you restart the app and navigate to `http://localhost:8080/bird` in an incognito/private browser window you'll get a login page appearing.
```

### Modularize `persistence` Library

Create a module declaration file `persistence/src/main/java/module-info.java` with the following content:

```java
module com.okta.developer.modules.persistence {

    requires java.annotation;
    requires spring.beans;
    requires spring.context;
    requires spring.data.commons;
    requires spring.data.mongodb;

    exports com.okta.developer.animals.bird;
}
```

Each `requires` keyword signalize that this module will be depending on some other module.
Spring, on version 5, is not modularized yet so its JAR files don't have the `module-info.java`. 

> When you have a dependency on the `modulepath` (former classpath for non-modular applications) like this they will be available as `automatic modules`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have a dependency on the `modulepath` (formerly the classpath for non-modular applications) like this they will be available as `automatic modules`.
```

> An `automatic module` gets its name from the property `Automatic-Module-Name` inside `MANIFEST.MF` or from the `JAR` filename itself if that is absent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `automatic module` gets its name from the property `Automatic-Module-Name` inside the Jar's `MANIFEST.MF` or from the Jar filename itself if that is absent.
```

> On Spring 5 the team was nice enough to put the `Automatic-Module-Name` for all the libraries. So those are the names used on our persistence app dependencies: `spring.beans`, `spring.context`, `spring.data.commons`, `spring.data.mongodb`.

Reviewer: idea: maybe mention why this is good? Maybe something about how this ensures that the module names do not change if/when Spring starts using modules?
(just an idea)

> The `exports` keyword exports all classes in the package. When another module uses a `requires` clause referencing this one it will have access to those classes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `exports` keyword exports all classes in that package. When another module uses a `requires` clause referencing this one it will have access to those classes. 
```

Reviewer: 🤔

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Build a Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modules"
author: bruno-leite
by: contractor
communities: [java]
description: "This tutorial shows how to create a multi-module Spring Boot application using Java 9+ modular system"
tags: [spring-boot, java, modules]
tweets:
- "Learn how to create a @springboot application using Java 9+ modular system"
- "Tutorial: Java 9+ modules with @springboot"
- "Spring Boot + Java Modules? Check it out"
image:
type: conversion
---

Java is one of the most mature and persistent development languages that exist. Recently it entered into a 6-month release schedule which enabled to deliver more frequent updates to the language.
One of those changes was the modular system that is available since Java 9.

> The Modular system adds two fundamental capabilities when building Java apps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Java Platform Module System (JPMS) system adds two fundamental capabilities when building Java apps:
```

- **Reliable configuration** - to replace the brittle, error-prone class-path mechanism with a means for program components to declare explicit dependences upon one another, along with
- **Strong encapsulation** - to allow a component to declare which of its public types are accessible to other components, and which are not.

Packages may be grouped into modules that serve as building blocks in the construction of very large programs. The declaration of a module specifies which other modules (and thus packages, and thus classes and interfaces) are required to compile and run code.

> We know that we have the visibility modifiers: public, private, protected, and default, but those are not enough to provide external visibility. It is common for a class to live inside a package and be used throughout the library, but it may be a class not meant for external use. Therefore, it has public visibility but on the other side, it shouldn't be available for applications depending on that library. This is the situation in which the Java Platform Module System (JPMS) can help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We know that we have the visibility modifiers: public, private, protected, and default, but those are not enough to provide external visibility. It is common for a class to live inside a package and be used throughout the library, but it may be a class not meant for external use. Therefore, it has public visibility but on the other side, it shouldn't be available for applications depending on that library. This is the situation in which JPMS can help.
```

This class will be stored on `persistence/src/main/java/com/okta/developer/animals/bird/BirdRepository.java`
```java
package com.okta.developer.animals.bird;

import org.springframework.data.mongodb.repository.MongoRepository;

public interface BirdRepository extends MongoRepository<Bird, String> {
}
```

At last, for the persistence module, we'll be creating a service class to expose the persistence operations.
This class will be stored on `persistence/src/main/java/com/okta/developer/animals/bird/BirdPersistence.java`

```java
package com.okta.developer.animals.bird;

import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Autowired;
import org.springframework.stereotype.Component;

import javax.annotation.PostConstruct;
import java.util.List;

@Component
public class BirdPersistence {

    private BirdRepository birdRepository;

    @Autowired
    public BirdPersistence(BirdRepository birdRepository) {
        this.birdRepository = birdRepository;
    }

    @PostConstruct
    void postConstruct(){
        Bird sampleBird = new Bird();
        sampleBird.setSpecie("Hummingbird");
        sampleBird.setSize("small");

>         save(sampleBird);

Reviewer: Great example, but the changes are persisted and rewritten when the app restarts
consider deleting entries before adding a new record 🤔 

```json
[{"id":"5f0c806e02bcd44eeed9af1c","specie":"Hummingbird","size":"small"},{"id":"5f0c81765c1e40081542ece5","specie":"Hummingbird","size":"small"},{"id":"5f0c81d67df83b42c643f521","specie":"Hummingbird","size":"small"},{"id":"5f0c827629c7cb426382ed9e","specie":"Hummingbird","size":"small"}]
```
